Add Cask tutorials (#3056)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/toolkit/web-server-input.md

---
title: How to handle user input?
type: section
description: Handling user input with Cask
num: 34
previous-page: web-server-query-parameters
next-page: web-server-websockets
---

{% include markdown.html path="_markdown/install-cask.md" %}

## Handling form-encoded input

> Similarly to path segments and query parameters, form fields are read by using endpoint method arguments. Use `cask.postForm`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to path segments and query parameters, we read form fields using endpoint method arguments. Use `cask.postForm`
```
English does not like the passive voice. Avoid when you can.

annotation and set the HTML form method to `post`.

In this example we create a form asking for name and surname of a user and then redirect to a greeting page. Notice the
use of `cask.Response`. The default returned content type is `text/plain`, set it to `text/html` in order for browser to display

> the form correctly.

Reviewer: It feels like we should have introduced this `cask.Response` subtlety before. We're mixing two issues here, it seems.

Author: I wonder if I should add a part dedicated specifically to this.

> The `formMethod` endpoint reads the form data using `name` and `surname` parameters. The names of parameters must

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `formEndpoint` method reads the form data using `name` and `surname` parameters. The names of parameters must
```

    cask.Response(data = html, headers = Seq("Content-Type" -> "text/html"))
  }

  @cask.postForm("/form")
  def formEndpoint(name: String, surname: String) =
    "Hello " + name + " " + surname

  initialize()
}
```
{% endtab %}
{% tab 'Scala 3' %}
```scala
object MyApp extends cask.MainRoutes:
  
  @cask.get("/form")
  def getForm() =
    val html =
      """<!doctype html>
        |<html>
        |<body>
        |<form action="/form" method="post">
        |  <label for="name">First name:</label><br>
        |  <input type="text" name="name" value=""><br>
        |  <label for="surname">Last name:</label><br>
        |  <input type="text" name="surname" value=""><br><br>
        |  <input type="submit" value="Submit">
        |</form>
        |</body>
        |</html>""".stripMargin

    cask.Response(data = html, headers = Seq("Content-Type" -> "text/html"))

  @cask.postForm("/form")
  def formEndpoint(name: String, surname: String) =
    "Hello " + name + " " + surname

  initialize()
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

## Handling JSON-encoded input

JSON fields are handled in the same way as form fields, except that `cask.PostJson` annotation is used. The topmost fields

> will be read into the endpoint method arguments and if any of them is missing or has an incorrect type, an error message
> will be returned with 400 response code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be read into the endpoint method arguments.
```
This could come later in the explanation. It is a bit much for the intro.

{% tabs web-server-input-2 class=tabs-scala-version %}
{% tab 'Scala 2' %}
```scala
object MyApp extends cask.MainRoutes {
  
  @cask.postJson("/json")
  def jsonEndpoint(name: String, surname: String) =
    "Hello " + name + " " + surname

  initialize()
}
```
{% endtab %}
{% tab 'Scala 3' %}
```scala
object MyApp extends cask.MainRoutes:

  @cask.postJson("/json")
  def jsonEndpoint(name: String, surname: String) = 
    "Hello " + name + " " + surname
  
  initialize()
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

Send the POST request using `curl`:

```shell
curl --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --data '{"name":"John","surname":"Smith"}' \
  http://localhost:8080/json
```

The response will be:
```
Hello John Smith
```

> Deserialization is handled by uPickle JSON library. To deserialize an object, use `ujson.Value` type.

Reviewer: I don't understand how this particular example deserializes? AFAICT it precisely *avoids* deserializing and instead presents the raw `ujson.Value`, doesn't it?

{% tabs web-server-input-3 class=tabs-scala-version %}
{% tab 'Scala 2' %}
```scala
object MyApp extends cask.MainRoutes {

  @cask.postJson("/json")
  def jsonEndpoint(value: ujson.Value) =
    value.toString

  initialize()
}

```
{% endtab %}
{% tab 'Scala 3' %}
```scala
object MyApp extends cask.MainRoutes:

  @cask.postJson("/json")
  def jsonEndpoint(value: ujson.Value) = 
    value.toString

  initialize()

```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

Send a POST request.
```shell
curl --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --data '{"value":{"name":"John","surname":"Smith"}}' \
  http://localhost:8080/json2
```

Server will respond with:
```
"{\"name\":\"John\",\"surname\":\"Smith\"}"
```

## Handling JSON-encoded output

Cask endpoint can return JSON objects returned by uPickle library functions. Cask will automatically handle the `ujson.Value`
type and set the `Content-Type application/json` header.

> In this example we use a simple `TimeData` case class to send information about the time zone and current time in a chosen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we use a `TimeData` case class to send information about the time zone and current time in a chosen
```

> location. To serialize a case class into JSON you need to define a serializer in its companion object.

Reviewer: There's "we" in the previous sentence and "you" in this one. We should be consistent throughout.

> {% tabs web-server-input-3 class=tabs-scala-version %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% tabs web-server-input-4 class=tabs-scala-version %}
```
